# SNHU CS-300: Data Structures and Algorithms: Analysis and Design

# What was the problem you were solving in the projects for this course?
  The focus of the projects in this course was to evaluate common data structures and algorithms for their runtime efficiency using big O analysis and choosing which data structures and algorithms are best for a given application. 
  Project one in this course focused on designing pseudocode for a binary search tree, hash table, and vector data structure. THe psudocode addressed the processes to read data from a csv file, check for format errors, parse each line from the csv file into the data structure, and print each piece of data from the data structure to the console. I was also tasked with performing big O analysis on the three data structure to determine which one was best suited for the application I would create in Project two. The big O analysis I performed on the three data structures focused on the runtime efficiency of insertion and searching for data within the data structure to guide our decision to which data structure would be best to implement in project two. 
  In project two, I was tasked with creating a CLI application using the data structure I chose in project one. The application is a course planner that reads information about a CS course from a csv file, loads that data into a C++ structure, then loads that structure into a node structure. The data includes the course number, course name, and course prerequisite, which a course may have between 0 and two course prerequisites. The data structure I chose was a binary search tree due to its quick search and insertion times. The other reason I chose a binary search tree is because the binary search tree is sorted as it is being created, so it reduces the future need to sort the data structure using another algorithm. However, to print the courses is order, I still had to implement a recursive function in order to traverse the tree correctly so that the courses would be printed in alphanumeric order as required.
 
# How did you approach the problem? Consider why data structures are important to understand.
 I approached the problem by evaluating each data structure and determining which one would best optimize the application based on the amount, and type, of data I was creating the data structure from. Prior to starting project two, I created my own programs utilizing a binary search tree and linked list that were inspired from previous assignments in this course. I did this to help solidify my understanding on how to build these data structures and how to access data within them for use within programs. Data structures are important to understand because they are an important foundation to establish for any functional program. Data structures such as the linked list, binary search tree, and hash table are examples of common data strcutres used to solve many real world problems in computer science and can be applied to a wide array of programs.
 
# How did you overcome any roadblocks you encountered while going through the activities or project?
  As with any problem, roadblocks are almost guaranteed to occur when tackling a particular problem. I handled these roadblocks with a multi-step approach. If I found myself stuck on a particular issue that I could not readily find the answer for, I would start with common online references to search for related issues. Most of the time this approach worked because almost any programming problem I have encountered, someone else has encountered and answers have been discovered. However, there were a few instances where the issue wasn’t so clear and searching for related issues was even more difficult. At these moments I would step away and allow my mind to process the problem both consciously and subconsciously. When I returned to my computer I would see the problem from a different angle and would start attacking the problem with small ideas and eventually work my way to a solution.
  
# How has your work on this project expanded your approach to designing software and developing programs?
  This project, and the material I learned in this course, has opened my eyes to the importance of understanding and using data structures and algorithms when programming applications. Prior to this course I had a disconnect with what best methods were preferred when working with data in an application outside of an externally lined database system. This project has helped me to rethink how I create future programs when working with stored data sets within the application itself. I have also learned best practice when implementing algorithmic design to perform operations on these data structures for optimal performance and user experience.
  
# How has your work on this project evolved the way you write programs that are maintainable, readable, and adaptable?
  This project has provided me with the tools necessary to continue writing programs in the future that are professional and adaptable to any program application need. Understanding data structures and algorithms are required for best practice when writing programs and provide a foundation to which programs of many sorts can be built on. Following best practice when creating well-known data structures and algorithms, along with well written in-line comments in the code, permits the program to be understood by any programmer and how it is intended to perform, including myself when returning to a program after time spent away from it. This extends to maintaining the program since these data structure and algorithms provide an almost universal understanding and have predicable uses in application design. Finally, they are easily adaptable to many application designs and use cases so it allows me a pathway to future application design by understanding the way in which I can tackle retaining and iterating through data sets within a program I create for almost any purpose. 
